---
categories:
  - arm
  - assembly
  - xcode
  - iOS
  - gcc
  - compiler
  - optimization
aliases: /arm-asm.html
subtitle: Sometime you have to get your hands dirty
title: ARM assembly for iOS with XCode
date: 2014-03-31
---


This week-end I spent a lot of time trying to optimize the code of my incoming
video game.  The game engine features a fluid simulation algorithm based on
this [excellent paper][gdc03] by Jos Stam.

The algorithm is CPU intensive, and so I tried my best to make the code as fast
as possible, which eventually means having to write the code in assembly.

Since I couldn't find much information about how to write assembly code for iOS
on XCode, here is a small tutorial I wrote about it.

## GCC inline assembly

XCode recognises any file ending with ".s" in a project as assembly.  Any
function declared in the file can then be called from the C code.  For small
chunk of assembly, though, there is a better way: using the C `asm` statement,
that allows to embed and call assembly code directly from C.  For an overview
of the syntax you can refer to [this documentation][arm-gcc-asm-cookbook].

Let's write a basic example: a function that adds two integers together using
the ARM `add` instruction.  Needless to say, for such a simple example there is
no advantage to writing assembly, the C version would result in exactly the
same binary code.

    static int add_two_int(int x, int y) __attribute__((noinline));

    #ifdef __arm__

    static int add_two_int(int x, int y) {
        int ret;
        asm volatile (
            "add %[ret], %[x], %[y]"
            // outputs
            : [ret]"=r"(ret)
            // inputs
            : [x]"r"(x), [y]"r"(y)
        );
        return ret;
    }

    #else

    static int add_two_int(int x, int y) {
        return x + y;
    }

    #endif

A few notes about this code:

- Why the `__attribute__((noinline))`?  I marked the function as static - as
  you always should for function local to a file.  But since I want to check
  the produced asm code in XCode, it is nice to force the compiler not to
  inline the function.  Clang recognises most of GNU gcc attributes, so we can
  use it the `noinline` attribute to mark the function as not to be inlined.

- I wrote a fall-back version of the code in plain C so that I support not only
  ARM but also other architectures.  For example the new iPhone 5 are now using
  arm64, so in that example XCode would compile the arm64 version using the
  fallback C code (if we wanted to also provide an arm64 version of the asm
  function we could have tested the `__arm64__` macro.

- In the assembly code, I never actually use a named register.  Instead I
  aliased `ret`, `x` and `y` in the output and input lists, then I can refer to
  them in the asm as %[ret], %[x], %[y].  The compiler will automatically
  assign them to one of the 'r' registers.  This is the nice thing about inline
  assembly.

- The volatile keyword is used to let clang knows that it should not try to
  optimize the assembly code (yes it would do that!)  Of course in that case I
  don't see how we could optimize such a simple function.

- Some people would use `__asm__` instead of `asm`, and `__volatile__` instead
  of `volatile`.  Those are exactly the same. the versions with underscores may
  be used to prevent clash with already defined functions or variables (and are
  mandatory if you want to code to compile in strict ansi mode.)  I prefer to
  use the short versions here for simplicity.

OK, so we can put this in our code and then use the function `add_two_int` as
if it was a normal static C function (and in fact it is!)

XCode is nice enough to let us see what the compiled version looks like.  For
that we have to click on the tuxedo looking like button in the top right of the
IDE, then in the drop down menu select "assembly".  A quick search for
`add_two_int` reveals the actual assembly code produced by the compiler:

    _add_two_int:
        add r0, r0, r1
        bx lr

As we see, the compiler decided to use the r0 register for both `ret` and `x`,
and the r1 register for `y`.  This is a clever choice, since the C function
call convention is using r0 and r1 to pass the two first parameters, and r0 as
the output.  Also note that the actual function name starts with an underscore,
as specified by the C ABI.

## A bigger example, with NEON instructions

Now let's try with a slightly more interesting example.  We are going to use
the vector instructions of the NEON arm extension to quickly divide all the
values of a 16 bit integer array by 2.  To make things really simple, we are
going to assume that the size of the array is a multiple of 8 and that it is
memory aligned to 128 bit.

In this new version of the code, we are using the NEON instruction vst1.16 that
can right shift eight 16bit integers in parallel.

    #if defined __arm__ && defined __ARM_NEON__

    static void div_by_2(int16_t *x, int n)
    {
        assert(n % 8 == 0);
        assert(x % 16 == 0);
        asm volatile (
            "Lloop:                         \n\t"
            "vld1.16    {q0}, [%[x]:128]    \n\t"
            "vshr.s16   q0, q0, #1          \n\t"
            "vst1.16    {q0}, [%[x]:128]!   \n\t"
            "sub        %[n], #8            \n\t"
            "cmp        %[n], #0            \n\t"
            "bne Lloop                      \n\t"
            // output
            : [x]"+r"(x), [n]"+r"(n)
            :
            // clobbered registers
            : "q0", "memory"
        );
    }

    #else

    static void div_by_2(int16_t *x, int n)
    {
        int i;
        for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
            x[i] /= 2;
    }

    #endif

A few notes:

- Since we are using the ARM NEON extension, we have to check for
  `__ARM_NEON__` as well as `__arm__`.  Just testing for `__ARM_NEON__` would
  generate an error when compiling for arm64.

- The loop label has to start with an upper case 'L' to tell the compiler that
  it is a local label.  Apparently, if you don't do it and the compiler decides
  to duplicate the assembly code, you might get a compilation error.

- Don't forget to specify the output as read/write (with `"+r"`).  If you do
  not, you might run into strange run-time bugs because the compiler will
  assume that `x` and `n` have not changed after your function call and might
  optimize the calling function accordingly.

- All the lines end with "\n" (end of line) followed by a "\t" (tab).  This
  make sure that your assembly code will be correctly indented.

## Conclusion

Being able to write assembly code is actually the easy part.  What is difficult
it to write **efficient** assembly code.  By efficient I mean that the code
should be faster than what the compiler would have produced from the C code.  I
am not that good at assembly, and that's why I am not going to claim that the
assembly code I put in this example will actually be faster than the C version.
In fact, with the memory access time being so slow on iPhone, I wouldn't be
surprised if both versions have similar performances (which is why measuring
the performance is so important).

In a follow up post I will try to compare the speed we can achieve with NEON
assembly compared to plain C version on an iPhone 4.

And if you want more information about ARM and NEON on iOS, here is a [detailed
article][shervinemami] I found online that goes much deeper into the topic:



[gdc03]: http://www.intpowertechcorp.com/GDC03.pdf
[arm-gcc-asm-cookbook]: http://www.ethernut.de/en/documents/arm-inline-asm.html
[shervinemami]: http://shervinemami.info/armAssembly.html
