---
categories: [code, C, C99]
aliases: /c-tricks.html
title: 10 C99 tricks
date: 2015-02-13
---

Here are ten interesting patterns and tricks I sometime use in my C code, some
are well known, some not so much.  I am sure all of them work with clang and
gcc (after fixing the evetual typos).  I didn't try with MSVC, but except for
no 1 and 5, I think it should also work.

[**edit**]: Here is a link to the [hacker news thread].

[**edit**]: Maybe the title is a bit misleading, this is not strictly about
C99.  Some items in the list are valid C89, and some others would not compile
with -std=c99 -pedantic, and there are also gnu extensions.  But pragmatically,
all of those will compile with recent gcc and clang compiler.

[hacker news thread]: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=9043594

## 0. Ternary operator without middle operand (gnu extension)

    // Instead of
    x = x ? x : 10;
    
    // We can use the shorter form:
    x = x ?: 10;
    
    // Advantage: if x is an expression it
    // will be evaluated only once.


## 1. Unamed struct for smart vector type.

    typedef union {
        struct { float x, y, z; };
        struct { vec2_t xy; };
        struct { float x_; vec2_t yz; };
        float v[3];
    } vec3_t;
    #define VEC3(x, y, z) { {x, y, z} }
    
    ...
    
    vec3_t vec = VEC3(1, 2, 3);
    // We can access the attributes in different ways.
    float  x    = vec.x;
    vec2_t xy   = vec.xy;
    float  z    = vec.v[2];

## 2. `IS_DEFINED` macro

    // As used in the linux kernel.
    // A macro that expands to 1 if a preprocessor value
    // was defined to 1, and 0 if it was not defined or
    // defined to an other value.
    
    #define IS_DEFINED(macro) IS_DEFINED_(macro)
    #define MACROTEST_1 ,
    #define IS_DEFINED_(value) IS_DEFINED__(MACROTEST_##value)
    #define IS_DEFINED__(comma) IS_DEFINED___(comma 1, 0)
    #define IS_DEFINED___(_, v, ...) v
    
    // Can be used in preprocessor macros:
    #if IS_DEFINED(SOMETHING)
        ...
    #endif
    
    // Or even directly in the code.
    // Same effect but looks better.
    if (IS_DEFINED(SOMETHING)) {
        ...
    }

## 3. Convenience macro for OpenGL code

    // Not really special, but so useful I thought
    // I'll put it here.  Can also be used with other
    // libraries (OpenAL, OpenSLES, ...)
    #ifdef DEBUG
    #  define GL(line) do {                      \
           line;                                 \
           assert(glGetError() == GL_NO_ERROR);  \
       } while(0)
    #else
    #  define GL(line) line
    #endif
    
    // Put GL around all your opengl calls:
    GL(glClear(GL_COLORS_MASK));
    GL(pos_loc = glGetAttribLocation(prog, "pos"));

## 4. Array size macro

    // Is there any C project that does not use it?
    #define ARRAY_SIZE(x) (sizeof(x) / sizeof((x)[0]))
    
    // Can be used like this:
    int a[] = {0, 4, 5, 6};
    int n = ARRAY_SIZE(a); // n = 4
    
    // Warning: does not work with array arguments to functions:
    int func(int a[]) {
        int nb = ARRAY_SIZE(a); // Would not work!
    }

## 5. Safe min macro (uses a gnu extension)

    #define min(a, b) ({ \
          __typeof__ (a) _a = (a); \
          __typeof__ (b) _b = (b); \
          _a < _b ? _a : _b; \
    })

## 6. Passing pointer to unnamed variables to function.

    // A func that expects a pointer to three int values.
    void func(const int *arg);
    
    // Instead of using a local variable.
    int tmp[] = {10, 20, 30};
    func(tmp);
    
    // We can write.
    func( (const int[]){10, 20, 30} )
    
    // Can be useful with a helper macro.
    #define VEC(...) ((const int[]){__VA_ARGS__})
    func(VEC(10, 20, 30));
    
    // (Also works with struct or any other type).


## 7. Named initializer, with default values

    // I use this one all the time when writing
    // video game.  One of the reason why I
    // don't like to use C++.
    
    // Let say we have this struct
    struct obj {
        const char *name;
        float pos[2];
        float color[4];
    };
    
    // We can write a macro like this one
    #define OBJ(_name, ...)             \
        (struct obj) {                  \
            .name = _name,              \
            .color = {1, 1, 1, 1},      \
            __VA_ARGS__                 \
        };
    
    // Now we can use the macro to create new objects.
    // This one with color defaulted to {1, 1, 1, 1}.
    struct obj o1 = OBJ("o1", .pos = {0, 10});
    // This one with pos defaulted to {0, 0}.
    struct obj o2 = OBJ("o2", .color = {1, 0, 0, 1});

## 8. X macros

    // Define this once.
    #define SPRITES \
        X(PLAYER,   "atlas_0.png", {0, 0, 128, 128})    \
        X(ENEMY0,   "atlas_0.png", {128, 0, 128, 128})  \
        X(ENEMY1,   "atlas_2.png", {0, 0, 64, 64})      \
        ...
    
    // Create an enum with all the sprites.
    emum {
        #define X(n, ...) SPR_##n,
        SPRITES
        #undef X
    }
    
    // Create an array with all the sprites values.
    struct {
        const char *atlas;
        int rect[4];
    } sprites[] = {
        #define X(n, a, r) [SPR_##n] = {a, r},
        SPRITES
        #undef X
    };
    
    // Many other possibilities...


## 9. State machine helper using `__LINE__`

    // This is a great trick.
    // Instead of:
    
    int iter(int state) {
        switch (state) {
        case 0:
            printf("step 0\n");
            return 1;
        case 1:
            printf("step 1\n");
            return 2;
        case 2:
            printf("step 2\n");
            return 3;
        case 3:
            return -1;
        }
    }
    
    // We can define:
    #define START switch(state) { case 0:
    #define END return -1; }
    #define YIELD return __LINE__; case __LINE__:;
    
    // And now the function can be written
    int iter(int state) {
        START
        printf("step 0\n");
        YIELD
        printf("step 1\n");
        YIELD
        printf("step 2\n");
        END
    }
    
    // It is possible to go totally wild with
    // this one.
