---
categories: [programming, basic]
title: BASIC was not just a programming language
date: 2023-12-24
---

{{<rawhtml>}}
<style>
  pre {
    padding: 1em;
    color: lightgreen;
    background-color: black;
  }
</style>
{{</rawhtml>}}

BASIC is often dismissed as an inferior language compared to its successors.
Common complaints are its use of line numbers, its heavy reliance on GOTO for
execution flow, and its lack of a stack for local variables.

What many critics overlook is that at the time of its use (during the first
wave of home computers), BASIC was not just a programming language; it was a
full development environment, akin to an IDE. It's a concept that's hard to
understand if you haven't used it at the time, as it's so different from how
we use computers today.

As you turned on your computer, you would immediately[^1] see a BASIC prompt.
This interface was where you did everything: it was your terminal, your text
editor, and your debugger.

First, you could directly type commands, and it would work like an interactive
shell, which was great for learning syntax and commands:

{{<rawhtml>}}
<pre>
Ready
X=10
Ready
PRINT(1/X)
 0.1
Ready
PRINT LEN("hello")
 5
</pre>
{{</rawhtml>}}

If you wanted to write a program with more than one instruction, there was no
need to use a text editor.  If you entered a line starting with a number, it
would automatically be interpreted as an edition command and added to the
current program instead of being executed. You could then use the run command
to run the program:

{{<rawhtml>}}
<pre>
10 X=10
20 PRINT X,EXP(X)
run
 10            0.1
</pre>
{{</rawhtml>}}

What is really nice is that as you wrote your program, you could still, at any
time, type a "terminal" command to directly check the result, so there was no
context switch between your editor and your terminal.

To add an instruction in the middle of the program, you just used a line
number in between, and it would automatically be inserted in the right
position. If you ran out of numbers, the `renum` command would recompute all
the line numbers for you. This is why it was important for BASIC to use
numbered lines; it was not just a way to label lines for GOTO commands, but
also the basis of the integrated program editing process.

The list function allowed you to list the code starting from the beginning or
from a given line number. This gave the same capability as a paging text
editor. There were a few other commands to edit a line, save the program on
disk, etc.

{{<rawhtml>}}
<pre>
15 X=X-1
30 IF X=0 THEN STOP
40 GOTO 15

renum
Ready
list
10 X=10
20 X=X-1
30 PRINT X,EXP(X)
40 IF X=0 THEN STOP
50 GOTO 20
Ready

run
 9                  8103.08392
 8                  2980.95798
 7                  1096.63316
 6                  403.428794
 5                  148.413159
 4                  54.59815
 3                  20.0855369
 2                  7.3890561
 1                  2.71828183
 0                  1
</pre>
{{</rawhtml>}}

This system also made debugging a program very easy. During execution,
pressing the ESC key twice would stop the program, and all the variables could
then be examined or changed, and the program then resumed. This worked well
since BASIC does not have stacks or local variables.

To see how it looked like on the actual computer, here is an example video I
found online of a typical session on the CPC 464:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1IwObNrfxk

[^1]: The Amstrad CPC 646 would literally take less than a second to boot,
      this is hard to believe in these days of slow booting computers:
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wITHivsuRfc&t=554s
